in with what interested in the set pattern of the
interview, what interested you in oceanography,
and what brought you to this sort of newly emerging
discipline, in your case, particularly early.
Yeah, wish you hadn't said that.
Mm-hmm.
Well.
When I was in graduate school in 1939, I entered
graduate school at the University of Buffalo. And
I got interested in limnology, which is the
oceanography of lakes. It's oceanography
without salt. And the man with whom I worked, Dr.
Tressler, T-R-E-S-S-L-E-R, Dr. Willis
Tressler, worked with me on a number of the lakes in
New York State and a bay near Rochester called
Irondequoit Bay. I give you this as a background
only because in the New York State lakes we had a
diversity of environmental conditions from
deep, deep lakes that were high in oxygen to lakes
that had very little oxygen because of all the
organic material. And then on Irondequoit Bay, we
planned a year's study going there every month in
order to see what happened. So when I got my
master's there, I decided to go on to work on the
doctorate. And as is so often the case, you decide
with whom you want to work. rather than
specifically where to go. And I wanted to work with
George Evelyn Hutchinson, who probably was and is
the greatest of the limnologists, the freshwater
ecologists. So while I was with the University of
Buffalo, I worked for a New York State fishing game
to get through school. And when I went to Yale to
work with Evelyn, I worked with the Connecticut
State fishing game. Now, while I was working on my
degree at Yale, I worked with Dr. Gordon Riley, who
now is probably one of the leading men in the world
on the food chain in the sea, starting with the
sun's energy to work on up through the energy
considerations to the Clamax predators, the
Tunas, for instance. Anyway,
while I was at Yale, the war came along, and I left to
teach in a little school where I did my
undergraduate work in Pennsylvania in a naval
marine radar school. And I got hopelessly bored
after about a year, a year and a half. So I wrote to
Dr. Riley and asked if there was any chance of
working with him, because I came to respect him so
much at Yale. At that time, he was at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. Now, in 1941, I had
worked with him on one cruise of the Atlantis out on
Georges and Grand Banks. She's a beautiful ship,
as you probably know. I have a picture of her over
there. Mostly at the time we were under full sail, I
worked as his chemist, so he knew me. And he knew
that I got terribly seasick and did things like
going up to the top of the 140-foot main mast and
freezing there, so they had to come up and get me
down and so forth. Anyway, he said, sure, come to
the Woods Hole Oceanographic. So I went with the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in 1942 or
and got involved in work on the physics of
underwater sounds. When you transmit a sonic
pulse into the ocean because of the vertical
changes in the temperature and to a much lesser
degree because of vertical changes in the
salinity, the sound is refracted.
And if the target is a submarine, Under some
conditions, it can go practically under the ship,
and you don't even know it's there. So I had spent
eight long years in college, studiously avoiding
anything in physics. Became a biologist and
aquatic biologist. Went with the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, working with Dr.
Riley Allen Vine, Columbus Islin, Fritz
Fuglester, Dean Pompous, Maurice Ewing, the
whole school of oceanography. And under contract
with Woods Hole, went to Miami to work on the
physics of underwater sound. Because at that
time, we were losing ships. I could sit in my hotel
room in Miami and see the tankers going up as they
were torpedoed.
And then I came back to Woods Hole after spending
time with Gordon and others on underwater sound.
They got me interested in going down in the
submarines to work on the compressibility of a
submarine as you dived and the ballasting as a
function of this thermocline, rapid change in the
temperature and thus in the density. And we
installed bathy thermographs on the submarines
and then went out on the submarines to teach other
diving officers how to use the records in
adjusting the ballast and the trim.
So I went back to Woods Hole in 1945, I think,
45 or 46, I don't remember, to work on a report and
summarizing what I had learned in oceanography
and propagation of sound in seawater and
operation of the submarines with Alfred
Redfield, who at that time was the assistant
director under Columbus Islin. And suddenly a man
by the name of Dr. Cliff Barnes, who's now retired
with the University of Washington and was one of
the first men in the field of oceanography to have a
degree in oceanography. Incidentally, he worked
for the Coast Guard. And the commandant of the
Coast Guard, Iceberg Eddie Smith, got the first
PhD in oceanography ever given in our nation. That
was at the University of Washington. Anyway.
Cliff came to Woods Hole and asked if I would
consider spending five weeks at Bikini, because
they were thinking of having some atomic bomb
tests. I'd just moved my wife and kids to Woods
Hole, and we were going to settle down after all of
this being away from the family. And I said, sure,
I'd love to go. So for six months in lieu of five
weeks, We worked on the oceanography, the flow
patterns through and around the Bikini Atoll in
preparation for both the air blast and the
underwater blast. An interesting aspect is they
had brought together probably every one of the
major oceanographers in our nation. Our leader
was Roger Rebell from Scripps, who's now with
Harvard. Cliff Barnes. And Walter Monk was there,
who's now the director of the big lab at Scripps.
Bill Von Arks from Woods Hole. Oh hell, I can't even
remember all of them. Hal Turner from Woods Hole.
I doubt if... Marston Sargent, who is at Scripps,
it's pretty hard to think of an oceanographer back
in 1946 in our nation who was not at Bikini. Gene
LaFond, who was with the Naval Electronics Lab and
is now retired from the government and has a
company of his own in...
as a consultant in oceanography. And while I was at
Bikini, I was offered a job with what was then the
Navy Hydrographic Office. Dr. Richard Fleming,
who was the senior oceanographer with Roger
Rebell, he's one of the authors Fairdrip Johnson
and Fleming was asked to head up the Division of
Oceanography at the Navy Hydrographic Office. So
I came back with Dr. Fleming, Dr. Barnes, Shirley
Bates, who's now the chief scientist with the
Coast Guard at the lab in Groton, Dr. John Lyman,
who had a variety of jobs and now retired in North
Carolina and myself were the nucleus of what
became the Navy Oceanographic Office. We started
with five people and ended up with over 2,000. And
it was rather an exciting development because, of
course, really the only person in that whole group
who had a degree in oceanography was Dr. Fleming.
In the early days, everybody we hired had a degree
in some one of the natural sciences, physics,
chemistry, biology, math, statistics, but there
were no people really with degrees in
oceanography because Scripps, which was about
the only institution other than the University of
Washington that had a curriculum in the marine
sciences in oceanography, kept bringing people
on board, looking towards getting a degree, and
Scripps would say, hey, if you could give me two
more years, we have a new contract with the Navy or
NSF or whoever it happens to be. So John Lyman,
who ended up with... Hydrographic Office with us
and then Department of Interior and so forth.
Pritchard, who ended up with Johns Hopkins. Dale
Leeper, who ended up with Texas A&M and is now out at
the Naval, what's it called, Naval School in the
West Coast. Monterey. Monterey. Wayne Burt, who
ended up as the director of Department of
Oceanography at Oregon State, all were PhD
candidates at Scripps. All got involved in
contractual arrangements. All left Scripps to
take jobs, then went back and got their degree
because they could tell Scripps to drop dead on the
contract route, you see, and get their degrees.
I had several questions along the way I'd like to
ask you about what we discussed thus far. What
exactly did you do at the bikini test? I was one of
the group that was concerned with the flow of water
through the atoll was in an area in which the other
trade winds piled the water up against the eastern
edge of the atoll and that formed a hydrostatic
head so that the water always flowed from east to
west through the the basin of the atoll and the idea
was after the the nuclear devices were exploded,
how soon could the people go back into the lagoon
with safety? So that meant that as long as the trade
winds were blowing, the water was piled up, and you
had a hydrostatic head, you had to flow through. I
remember we couldn't figure out one area of the
lagoon. So we flew back. Bill VanArks and I flew
from Bikini to Kwajalein to the west coast to
Washington to Woods Hole so he could look at the
flow pattern by building a scaled-down model of
the atoll in a flume at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic And we found out what it was was
horizontal eddies at the major pass into the
lagoon. Anyway, the day before the air blast, the
trade winds stopped blowing. The hydrostatic
head thus decreased. The air blast went off. They
brought the people back in on our prediction as a
result of the flow pattern. The flow pattern, of
course, had completely changed. They had to sink
the damn ships. They had to throw away the men's
clothes. It was a mess. It just shows you the
vagaries of what we now call ocean-atmosphere
accoupling and air-sea interaction. Even in
those days, we knew something was going on, but we
didn't realize like we do as of... the last two days
I've been involved with a group and about all we
have discussed is ocean atmosphere coupling and
air-sea interaction and the global weather
because we now realize that this is a factor that we
have to understand or we never will be able to
improve our understanding of global weather.
Did there seem to be any conflicts at Bikini
between military and civilian oceanographers?
No, there were no really military
oceanographers. All the people that were there in
terms of oceanography were civilians. The only
man in uniform, well, there were two. Well, there
were three. Roger Revell was a commander. Marston
Sargent was a commander. I spent a week with him on
rongelap doing some work, and the only thing he
wore the whole week was his commander's hat with
the gold leaves. And there was a marine captain
from a museum in Chicago interested in the birds
out there, and the rest were civilians. The prime
purpose of the military was to provide logistics,
to provide small craft to get onto the reefs. Now,
there were some arguments. Some of the elderly
scientists at that time, I was quite young
compared to now, of course, who felt that they
weren't receiving the attention in terms of the
priorities they'd ought to get. Well, the Roger
Revell and Marston Sargent and Cliff Barnes and
the cool heads in command, I'd say no. There was no
overt conflict at all. Argument has conflict now.
Did the aftermath of the test, except for the
combination of title wins, come out about like you
had expected it to? Well, of course we didn't
expect, because we had... nothing to base
expectations on. I went out again the next summer
on a repeats survey, and I'll admit I was very
surprised at the level of the radionuclides in the
hole that the underwater blast blew in the bottom
of the lagoon. Now that was ignorance on my part.
There were those who knew so much more than I did
about the half-life, and then I used Well, there
was a man from AEC by the name of Seymour who was with
the University of Washington, continued work for
years on the biologically concentrated
radionuclides before the people who had been
moved to the island of Lingenai from Bikini were
allowed to move back. level had reached a safe
level. But the first thing, on the air blast we went
off about six miles and stopped the ship and it was
just at dawn, it was a beautiful morning and we had
the radio on and we heard the bombardier say, bombs
away. we had read in the newspapers that the blast
was going to open up a hole in the ocean floor and all
these other things. The bomb went off and it was one
of the most fabulously beautiful things,
awe-inspiring I've ever seen. The first sound I
heard after the bomb went off was a young enlisted
man in an absolutely odd voice say, geez, just like
a pair of lady skivvies. It was the most beautiful
colors in that morning sunrise you've ever seen.
To him, that was about the most appropriate thing
to compare this color to. It was probably the most,
I don't momentous thing I would ever see or ever
will see was that bomb going off at six miles away
and the first thing I heard was a beautiful remark.
Then after the bomb then you come to the
oceanographic office. I assume it's Fleming then
who makes the original contact with you? Yes,
that's right. And had you known him prior to? No.
I'm really not sure why he got in touch with me now
that you ask that after all these years. I had
accepted a National Research Council Fellowship
to go back to school and do some more graduate work
when the offer came from him. I was at Bikini when
the offer came, and I had to make a decision whether
to join the government or to go back to school.
presented such a challenge to develop the first
really major oceanographic activity in the
federal government. And it was. It was the only, in
fact. Office of Naval Research was under the Dr.
Revell's leadership. He was the head, along with
Mary
editor of Deep Sea Research, worked at Woods Hole,
works at Woods Hole Oceanic, Mary Sears,
S-E-A-R-S, and she was a commander of the Navy, and
she and Captain Revell at that time ran the
oceanographic office in the Navy hydrographic
office before Fleming took over. It was just an
interesting challenge about the only. How did you
perceive your job when you first arrived there?
What sort of things did you want to do? This is
before the famous tenure plan. Oh, gosh, yes. I
don't know. I was so fresh out of school. The only
job I'd ever really had was the job with the school I
mentioned as instructor in the radar school, and
then going directly with the Woods Hole
Oceanographic. And I knew from my experiences on
destroyers and submarines and that bikini that I
had fallen completely in love with the ocean, that
it was just to be my whole life. imagine a life not
involved with the oceans. And so Dr. Fleming
indicated that one of the plans for the new
Division of Oceanography at the Hydrographic
Office was to obtain some seagoing vessels. And so
I saw an opportunity to have my cake and eat it, and
to get back to sea, of course.
Did you not, you first commissioned two vessels,
is that correct? Well, after we formed the
Division of Oceanography and we began working
with the Navy, because it was the Navy
Hydrographic Office at that time, we worked with
Admiral Momsen and the Submarine Force, the
editor of the Momsen Long, and Admiral Grenfell
and some officers that I had known, and this is a
marine force, during the war. And Dr. Byrnes
prepared a chart to show for the North Atlantic,
the areas that we simply had no oceanographic
knowledge whatsoever. And most of them were in the
North Atlantic in the winter, which I didn't quite
realize this significance of. So we got two AVPs.
These are the big ex-coast guard seaplane
tenders. And Dr. Lyman and I designed the
alterations to convert these two big ships into
oceanographic research vessels.
And that was the San Pablo and the Rehoboth. And we
then spent Let's see, until 1951, I was at an
International Union of Geology and Geophysics
meeting in Europe. I had just come back from a
cruise in the Arctic on the icebreaker Edisto.
Fallen completely in love with the Arctic, now on
top of enjoying going to sea. The Arctic was so
fabulously beautiful. And I could see so many
interesting problems on ice, icebergs and ice
formation. Came home from that long cruise up
around Yanmeyan and into what now would be
considered as the Russian waters. Then went to
Europe and came home and immediately got a polio.
That kind of changed my plans. And while I was in
Europe, I was offered a job at the Bureau of
Commercial Fisheries Laboratory in Hawaii to
work on the oceanography of the tropical Pacific
and other distribution of the Tunas, pure
descriptive oceanography. So while I was on the
San Pablo and the Rehoboth, and having had some
experience, which so few people had, I went on
these cruises as a senior scientist. I mention
that only that I was able to essentially plan the
cruises to meet the needs of all of the areas of the
Atlantic that we knew so little about. And I was
able, because of my years with Woods Hole, work
with Val Worthington and Fritz Fuglister and Dean
Pompous and people at Woods Hole who were so
knowledgeable about the North Atlantic and about
seagoing techniques and about equipment and
sampling. They went out with me on the early
cruises to train me, and we had a cadre of enlisted
men, a hydrographic division, it was called, on
the ship under an ensign. And these young lads were
the ones who worked with us as civilians, too.
occupy the stations and the ships worked
together. Ship A and Ship B would be on station and
Ship A would go here and Ship B would go here and Ship
A would go here and Ship B would go here. This went on
week after week, month after month. We worked from
Philadelphia to Iceland to Scapa Flow in
Scotland, to Plymouth, to Gibraltar, to the
Azores, to the Canary Islands, areas that just
nobody had ever worked before since the days of the
Carnegie and the Challenger and so forth. So when I
did get polio, I was able to to use all of this
knowledge and experience at a desk. So I did go to
Hawaii in 1952 with the oceanographic program at
the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries Lab and stayed
there until 62 as their chief oceanographer and
then the assistant director. 62, I had an offer to
come to Washington to develop a laboratory that
would have its base on Virginia Key in Miami to be
the Bureau's, Department of Interior's, major
oceanographic and fishery research lab in the
southeastern United States. So after 10 years in
Hawaii, I decided to come back to Washington.